hi its ton of table stuff here and today
we're going to have a look at making a
Coletti era ravine crossbow so basically
there's a lake in France Danny Leo where
there was a settlement about a thousand
years ago that was then excavated in the
not-too-distant past and they found the
remains of a crossbow it's a very light
boat probably a hunting bow almost
certainly not a war bow we don't have
any war bows war crossbows going back
that far there's another one a rising
peg system from skåne in Scandinavia it
is also very simple but at the same time
I believe and then there is the quality
air to share Avene bow what's notable
about it is it has three components for
a film industry so it's very simple bow
to make very backwards so it's it's a
light hunting bow maybe used for fishing
maybe use for birding we don't know but
we're gonna start by making the bow so
whenever you make a crossbow that
absolute first start has to be making
the bow itself because that tells you
what the brace height on the bow is
going to be and what the draw length is
going to be say if you start with the
stop then you really limit yourself
about what you can do with the bow
itself so and that makes life more
difficult because the stock is the easy
bit to make if you like so we're going
to start with the bow and I have here a
piece of ash and it's actually an odd
handrail so it'll be very suitable but
if we have a look on here we have to
work with the growth rings of the bow
itself so you can see here that the
growth rings are slightly inconveniently
not parallel with the side of the
handrail so we have to take out a piece
of wood roughly here and we can start to
work that down can keep it flat on the
back most crossbow prods were flat it
also makes it easier to make a bow if
you a D section bow is always harder to
make and in fact it works very well I
mean the Native American Indians
basically stuck with various flat bow
design
the knight and bow from that the Vikings
used from Scandinavia again flatboat as
far as I know
so it's an established form it's just
when you think longbow along bow is D
section but this is not of course a
longbow what is also notable about this
bit of wood here is that the grain runs
straight that means that I can work it
very easily there's no sort of kinks
where boughs came out there's no war
pitch in it I'll be able to get a good
piece of timber out of this or bit just
an ordinary bit of ash handrail so the
first thing I'm going to do is cut it
down so I'm going to use bandsaw now for
just cropping this out you could do this
with a plain or even hand saws is just
this is going to be faster for us
[Music]
so now we've got our billet timber you
can see running up here the grain on the
side so it's nice and straight so within
the boundary of the of the billet itself
there is a floor here that I'm going to
watch out for so I'm going to try and
work that out it's it's basically I
don't know if you can see but there's a
little void in the wood
what is deeper within the wood through
there
I don't know so we've got to watch out
for that we've now got our billet
sitting in the vise and this is the back
of the Bo's this is the bit that's going
to be facing the quarry that you're
shooting at and I've got to get this
down now to a single growth ring from
each tip to tip so it's going to change
this front angle a bit and then we're
going to redress it again on the bandsaw
[Music]
so not sure how much you can tell but
you can see there are different colors
here so the lighter one is the actual
good wood and the darker one here is the
sort of the pithy wood I'm not sure if
that's like spring growth or winter
growth or whatever but I've still got
another layer I'm going to take another
grow through and complete growth ring
off this billet and then we should be
more or less forward to the billet
okay so we've got our billet thinned
down now it's got one continuous growth
ring on the front all the way to just
about here where the grain just dips
down slightly actually so I'm gonna work
with the grain now and take a spokeshave
and dig into that a little bit to try
and get back a continuous growth ring if
I can so just here is really the
important bit so we're gonna do that now
and then we will taper it into more of a
bow section Oh what I would say before
we go is there is a floor in the wood
here in a flat bow this is not so
important well this a long bow this
would fail you'd get an elbow there
hinge whatever you want to call it it
would snap ultimately it should be okay
on a flat day I'm just gonna if you can
see on the end here it's of a trapezoid
it's not square so I'm just gonna trim
this square on the saw just so I've got
a reference point and then we will
measure out and do another saw cut
[Music]
so first thing is from the center of the
bow and it is 99 centimeters now I'm not
worried about measuring this to
accurately says I'm gonna cut this on a
saw for the sake of speed but you cannot
make a bow and just put it on a saw and
call it done you have to tear it will
come to that process next so the fact
that this is just a little bit
approximate at this stage really doesn't
matter because the finished bow will be
definitely two different dimensions on
each side simply because the wood flexes
differently so this piece of wood will
Bend in one way this piece of wood will
Bend in a slightly different way so I'm
just gonna store it now for speed and
then clean it up on the plane so what
I'm doing now I'm just sort of finally
tracing down that growth ring just to
make it short make sure if I've got it
as good as I can the timber obviously
moves slightly so you've got work with
it I find a spokeshave at this point
it's better because you can move it with
the grain of the wood and as you see
that you've got dip down here and then
swoop that out then it allows you to do
that so basically you can see from this
it's kind of flat and kind of
rectangular but actually it does Bend
slightly and that's because I'm having
to work with the wood this is not a
piece of MDF it's not piece of chipboard
and if you excuse the pun it will not
bend to my will I have to work with the
bow itself with the wood itself so there
is some slight lack of straightness but
the idea is that when you draw it into a
bow that'll go you won't see it
right so we're going to start tillering
the bow now so basically I've cut the
tapers in this way in this way and
playing them flat I've also just thinned
the tips slightly but on the belly of
the bow that inside of the boat of it
the face is you and there you can cut
through the growth rings it's on the
front that you want to try and avoid
that if you can so first thing I'm doing
really is just popping it in the vise
here just getting a feel for how how
it's looking like it's flexing so um at
the moment you know it's okay
I can start to put it on what's called a
tiller tiller stick I'll show you that
now and we will get an idea of the
beginning of the bend and then from
there on in there's no measurement
there's no drawing you just look at the
bend and you adjust the wood accordingly
so I'm just gonna cut the knocks in now
so I can put a string on it so I've just
cut some simple knocks in now and I'm
gonna put a string on it which is slack
I'm not gonna brace the bow at this
point so I can see from that we're
beginning to get something like a bow so
this device here is just a tillering
stick all it is is something to put the
bow into at the top and some pegs at a
known distance so I can pull the string
back and measure the distance that the
bow comes back but what is really
important is this allows me to step back
a little bit from the boat and to have a
look at it and to have a look at the
curvature of the bow so what I do is
they just put a little bit of brace high
on it and I looked how it's bending now
I don't know if you can see it there but
this limb actually is bending in a
fairly nice curve this one comes around
in a curve
and then this portion here is barely
bending at all so I'm just gonna mark it
now and so that I know what I'm doing
I'm just gonna take away some wood in
this area here but on the belly of the
bow always on the belly of the bow or
the sides never on the front now so I'm
just going to take it down and skim a
little bit of wood and this is just a
very repetitive process a little bit at
a time
and then once you're confident you can
pull it down to the next step and again
at the next step you adjust the curve
again and you just do this until you get
to the draw weight that you want now the
bow as it stands now it feels quite
stiff obviously as you'd expect but I'm
getting flex here but actually not so
much on both these parts so I'm just
gonna thin the limbs down a little bit
all the way to the tips so we've got it
on the tiller now on a slack string nice
curve on that arm little less nice here
a bit of a hinge point but next thing is
just to relieve a bit of wood here
because that's remaining very stiff so
I'm just gonna take that section down a
little bit in thickness
[Music]
it's all I'm doing now is just flexing
it a bit going towards the next point
that I'm gonna knock it onto just helps
to sort of train the wood up a bit
rather than just going straight into it
it's also quite cold here and it helps
to warm the wood which does no harm yeah
so we've got a nice curve on this side
this side just a little bit stiff so
I'll just gonna take a little bit more
wood away this side probably from about
there coming through I think so we put a
shorter string on the bow now so we've
got a brace height just gonna put some
scales on it and it's not a very
powerful bow but that is what happens
when you want to do it in a hurry and
make sure that it works so we're coming
in at about thirty pounds a little bit
more 32 34 something like that it's a
nice light weight little boat to make it
easy to shoot so now I'm just filing the
Knox in before they were a little light
they were just for working the bow so
now I'm putting them in properly putting
them in a slight angle
and then of course the same on the other
side so we're gonna make a string now
for for the boat we're gonna do a very
simple one shouldn't take us too long
there's many ways you can do it but
we're doing this in three parts to give
reinforced ends and I'll show you what I
mean by that as we get to it so I'm just
looping round and round now to make a
very simple bundle of cords this is a
linen thread takes about 50 pounds 22
kilos and draw away so we're not going
to need too many of them and the thicker
your bow string the more energy it takes
out of the bow so you don't want too
thick but you don't want it very thin a
modern Dacron string for instance
basically it's it's too thin often to
sit well on the back of the Berlin so on
the back of the bolt so it doesn't shoot
cleanly so you want a little bit of
fatness to your string it's just gonna
knot in it very simple knot just to hold
the cords so you'll now take this skein
of cords off just to keep it bundled up
in medieval days you'd whip it I don't
think they did so I'm just turning it
inside now a few times just so that it
holds itself together nicely okay so now
we're going to build some loops that go
on the ends of the string and they get
twisted in so we'll just lay this scheme
onto one side just trying to keep it
reasonably neat so now we're just going
to make the end loops so I'm gonna put
in 14 because that is the same number as
in the main string for
so the thread is a linen thread with a
breaking strain of about 50 pounds 22
kilos so there'll be absolutely plenty
here but you don't want your string to
be too thin otherwise it doesn't engage
with the back of the bolt very well too
thick of course and you're losing a lot
of the energy of the bow into driving
the string because it weighs quite a lot
so it's a very simple thing now we've
got our two loops and we just pull the
center of that loop through so it just
forms and not on the end of the string
do the same at the other end so we're
doing the same on the other end so you
just pop it through and just pull the
bundle through like that so we've now
got a string now as you can see some of
these are a little bit flappy we want to
get tension the same on all of them so
I'm just gonna back that loop off again
on both sides just give it a little a
little movement and now you can see all
the cords have gone tight so I'm gonna
pull it up same again on the other side
and that way the same load is on all of
the strip all of the cords so we'll just
check that for size now it should be a
little smaller than the bow to account
for brace height so it is in fact a tiny
bit smaller and we will put some
twisting into it which helps keep the
cords together and gets it to the right
size so but a couple of sort of
inside-out twists on the end loops that
will also help to hold everything
together
also the twisting action shortens the
string slightly which is what we want so
that you get a good brace high on your
bow and then what we'll do now is just
give it a little twist just spinning it
around my finger there and that now
should be give or take about the right
sizes for the bow and we can always
increase or decrease the length of the
string by adding or taking away twists
so now I've got to serve the ends of the
string so basically what that means is
just whipping some cord round and round
it so it all holds together and it sits
in the nox nicely so just doing two
pieces at once just place a bit faster
generally you would probably whip all
the way but the sake of this I'll just
show you how to do the ends
I'm just going to find the center of the
string so two chords again just gonna
start on one end and then wind it away
and here is our finished string so later
on I'll give it coat of wax but let's
just see if it fits the boat so at the
moment it is almost exactly the right
size when the bow is slack but of course
we're going to brace it so we're just
gonna pop some twists into it and we're
looking for about eighty millimeter
three-inch brace height something like
that
85 millimeter brace hi
so we've got the string on the bow brace
height so we're just gonna draw it back
down so that's probably where we'll run
it maybe a little more
we've got enough in the bow so it's
about 11 and a half inch power stroke
something like that so come down so 28
centimeter 29 centimeter 11 1/2 inches
we'll run the bow so now we're going to
take our bow and fit it to a stock so
the first thing to do is find the center
line on the bow and then mark the width
of that on the stock here you want a
little bit of depth there and then you
put an angle in maybe about 10 degrees
or so so that's the first thing we're
going to do we're going to cut that in
position the bow and then we can get the
brace on the bow and market from there
[Music]
so now cut the socket for the bow with a
slight angle on it I'm just going to pop
it all in breaks the bow and make sure
that all sits well so now we've got the
bow into the stock the string is sitting
on top of the stock very nicely the
angle looks good so I'm now going to
mark the brace height of it so that's
the brace height of the bow and the
string at full draw is going to be 11
and a half inches back from that about
28 centimeters from there I'm just going
to measure and Mark that distance so
it's that point that the string is gonna
be pulled back to we're now going to
build in the very particular shape of
the quality of the sheriffing bow so
we're going to bring that line back this
part here you just want a slight return
on it that is where the string the cord
that locks the bow into place sits so
we've got that line now and we're going
to start to get the string notch in as
well so I've just marked the position of
that and we'll actually drill that down
now and cut through that so that that
can be our next step and we make sure
that that works fine
[Music]
so just drilled through for the the
trigger notch here so we'll cut down
with a saw there and file it up and make
sure that the bow and so the next step
now is just to cut away the bits that we
don't want to give the the bow that very
distinctive look of the you know quality
I do sheriff in bow
[Music]
so now we've got the very distinctive
shape and we've got to get the trigger
in there so the trigger is actually just
like a bent piece of wood they're just
pivots around a hole here and pushes the
string out of the notch now you could
cut it out of any bit of grain wood ash
wood is good box wood is good they're
very tough but I've actually got a bit
of box wood here with a natural bend in
it so that's going to help us strength
wise so I'm gonna actually use that the
curve of this wood so that the grain is
kept true so I'm just going to cut this
down now and latch is actually going to
end up being our trigger here
[Music]
so now we've obviously got a somewhat
bent and horrible looking bit of wood so
I'm just going to flap this off on a
sander easiest way for you to do it
would be to foil it if you haven't got a
sander back in a moment so here we have
the trigger and it's working with the
grain of the wood there because of that
branch so it will be nice and tough so
we have a pivot hole here and we're
gonna drill one into there and it's
gonna sit there push up
[Music]
so the next step now is to cut down a
groove for the trigger to sit into so
I'm just going to pop it centrally not
using any measuring tools because of
course our thousand-year-old compatriots
didn't have verniers and I'm just going
to cut a tiny little bit out in front of
the notch as well just to make sure that
that will seat properly under it so
we'll just drill down we can always make
it deeper if it's not deep enough so
it'll drop right so let's start to clean
that
[Music]
popping the trigger into position just
using a drill bit as a pivot so that
looks like it is going to work perfectly
so now we're the next thing we're going
to test the bow actually with the
trigger system but this corner here of
the notch is very very sharp so
obviously we don't want that we want
this whole area to be sort of polished
and waxed and nice so I'm just gonna
smooth that off a little bit so just
putting a bit of a radius on it same on
the other side and then we will run a
little bit of sandpaper in there just to
smooth it all up and make it loveliness
of course our thousand-year-old cousins
were short of sandpaper but they did use
shark skin
and then what we'll do is we'll run a
bit of beeswax into here before we shoot
the proper just make sure everything's
looked after we don't want it to where
the string it's in quickly so it looks
like it's no work let's all cross our
fingers thank so draw it back into
position that's good it's nice and
secure I'm just going to push down on
the trigger now that's it so far as I
can tell except for the groove on top
that's now going to be a working boat so
let's cut the groove so we've now got a
central groove I'm just gonna run a
chisel down it start
they certainly used wooden scrapers
scrapers for doing worden and even metal
as well as they're very often Fuller's
and sword blades and saxs the Vikings
used to do it a lot are actually scraped
in ground so the scraper tool it's just
in this case a 12 millimeter bit of
steel bar with a sharp edge on it not
blade sharp
and because of the length of it it turns
a bit like a plane to straighten itself
out so the fact that the cut was not
quite straight actually doesn't really
matter because just like you can sort
out a bit of wood and planer it will
find its own straight line so we now
have the working pieces of the bow we've
got the bow in the string we've got the
trigger the stock with the bolt groove
so now really we just got to sand the
thing down smooth it and then we'll
start to assemble one thing to note is
you've got a sharp corner up here again
that's gonna wear the string so we just
want a bit of a curve on the top here
and then the rest of it you just curve
it to make it comfortable tilt one fin
wouldn't pick it doesn't matter that
it's spin because it takes barely any
load at all and peg is in trigger works
on the boat so lock this and all of this
is to put the binding on to hold the
boat so it's a simple one hook that
round feed it through and then you've
got to splice it the right length now
anybody who splices ropes is going to
know that splicing exactly the right
length is gonna be difficult so we
splice it basically the right length and
then if we need to pack this bow out we
can just put pieces of very thin leather
behind it just to get it to the right
kind of time
so there is where we're gonna splice it
I think to be honest go and have a look
on youtube if you want to see how to
splice ropes it's probably going to be
the easiest thing this is about bones
it's not that splicing broke so we're
going to put the bow on now with the
bridle so I've spliced it in through the
boat up the bow into position around
tight White's be fairly tight and then
we're on the bow is now in position and
ready to shoot so we have the bow
everything is assembled so it's time to
shoot so just span it by hand throw it
back putting the bolt in
[Music]
[Applause]
so you've got to be careful not to get
the back of the bolts over the top of
the trigger peg otherwise it just clips
it out the way you know
streets nicely
[Applause]
you